that up.
Got to back that up
with another set.
So, what happened this then
is something that I
have coined last rep
What is last rep syndrome?
Well, I came in knowing that I wanted to
get eight reps.
And a lot of the times when you know you
got to get a certain number and it's
going to be hard, psychologically you
set yourself up so that the last rep is
going to be hard.
And everything moved well and by rep
seven
I was like, "Oh, this is great.
I'm going to get this." And then all of
a sudden
the eighth rep was slow and grindy.
And that's what last rep syndrome is.
So, a lot of the times
I'll come in and uh you know, when I'm
coaching someone I'll say things like
I don't know.
I don't know what to say. I don't know
how to cue someone. I don't know how to
motivate someone to
perform the last rep, you know, like
make the last rep easy. I don't know.
Last rep best rep. You hear people say
all these things, but either way, I
think that
that last rep was grindy because I was
being silly. That's my point that I'm
trying to make.
What I mean by being silly is you tell
yourself it's going to be hard, so it
ends up being hard.
Uh anyway, so that's one set of eight. I
got to do one more set of eight. I'm
going to give myself a good rest. And
then I'm going to give you guys
a $1,000 training training strategy for
free.
What does $1,000 training strategy mean?
Well, it's how much I paid for a
consultation with who I believe to be
one of the best
strength coaches
in our history. That's Charles Poliquin.
Many years ago he was my mentor. He's
passed away.
And
I spent a lot of money with education
with Charles.
And every now and then I would get
consultations, one-on-one consultations.
And
that's how much it cost. $1,000 is what
he charged. And it was worth it.
And I'll tell you what made it worth it.
A lot of the times when people give free
value like what I'm giving you guys and
what I always give is free value, but
it's not like not valuable.
It's very valuable. But a lot of people
look at it and they go
"Oh, so that's just free stuff, so I
don't have to listen to it."
But when you pay for it
like if you paid $1,000 for the hour,
I'll tell you what what you do. You hang
on to every word. And that's what would
happen with Charles when I used to speak
to him and pay him that much money.
And that's fine. Like is it worth it? Is
is it not? Like for me it was absolutely
worth it. The guy had a lot of
perspective, a lot of experience at the
highest level.
And it was worth it. It was the best
information available.
And what made it more worth it was the
fact that because I spent so much money,
$1,000. That's not like I'm not loaded
and $1,000 is is just like grows on
trees. No, it's not like that at all.
That's just how much I valued my
coaching. That's how much I valued
wanting to be a better athlete and
wanting to be a better coach.
I was investing in my mentors.
And
yeah, so he gave me this program
strategy, which is what I'm going to
give you. It's called rotary
periodization.
And
the way that he said it was like this is
the best style for powerlifters. So, I
was like, "Damn, I want the best style."
Uh and then it ended up you know, I
always say there's no such thing as best
and worst. There's so many different
programs that are amazing and a lot of
high-level lifters like the best of all
time are all following different
programs. So, how could one be the best?
It's not.
But it's pretty damn good. And I'm going
to give it to you for free, but I paid
$1,000 bucks for it.
So, what's that worth for you? Anyway,
I'm not going to do it right now because
I've got to do one more set
of eight. And I'm going to try not to do
the last rep-itis thing.
What did I call it? Last rep syndrome.
Not last rep-itis, whatever.
I'm going to try not do that. I'm going
to try and make the eighth rep
you know, not just like grind out just
because it's supposed to be hard. I'm
going to try and push it. All right.
Give myself rest and we'll do it again.
Nice.
Good one. Good one. I think that
What are we doing?
We'll do one this time.
Eight. It's the left hand on the left
hand. We're happy, so
hard to say, but I feel like the eighth
rep was a little bit better
on that set.
You be the judge. Whatever. Either way,
I got two sets of eight, which was the
goal for this program.
So, what I want to
teach you is this new programming
strategy. It's not really new. Whatever.
This new from my channel.
And it's rotary periodization.
So, if you've ever heard of different
styles of periodization, you've heard of
linear, conjugate, undulating. I suppose
you could call it undulating.
Um rotary. That's just what Charles
called it.
But the way that you do it
is
a typical like a block periodized model
or linear periodized model is you kind
of follow the same rep scheme for
the mesocycle. So, if it's a four-week
block, you know, today is eights.
You do eights for the four weeks. And
then you do sixes for the next four
weeks. Then fours for the next four
weeks. Then twos for the next four
weeks. That's very
linear
in nature. And that's a very
standardized style of programming that
absolutely works.
But what the rotary is
is alternating rep ranges every week.
So,
here we did eights. Last week I did 10.
So, you can do this for a long period of
time. So, last week I did 10s. This week
eights. 10s on 160. Eights on 170. And
then next week the goal is sixes on 180.
So, you got 10 8 6.
All right? That's the one the first
wave. 10 8 6.
That's weeks 1 2 3. Then the next three
weeks is
9 7 5.
10 8 6. 9 7 5. What's next? 8 6 4.
7 5 3.
6 4 2.
5 3 1.
All right? So, how many weeks is that?
There's a lot of weeks, you know, but
how long do we train for? We train
forever. But it's a really nice way of
getting multiple rep ranges and multiple
physical qualities through a block.
Something I notice with my training is
when I stay on the same rep range for a
long period of time,
especially as I get to the heavy
uh low rep heavy weight rep ranges,
it just hurts after a while. Going, you
know, like let's just say you do a phase
of fours then twos, you know, so there's
like as I mentioned before in that
linear model, eights, sixes, fours,
twos. So, fours for a whole phase.
That's pretty heavy. Fours for a whole
phase is pretty heavy. And then what's
the next phase?
Twos. It's even heavier.
That's like that's eight whole weeks,
say if they're if they're four-weekly
mesocycles, eight whole weeks in, you
know, rep ranges under five and loads
kind of above
80% 85 90% even, you'll be exploring.
And if you're doing that week after
week,
there's a few things that happen in my
experience with me.
Is yeah,
to get strong you need to practice the
skill of of lifting heavy weights with
low reps.
However,
there's two problems with this. One, it
comes
it taxes your body a lot, all right? So,
heavy weights on your joints, especially
when you start getting really strong.
So, like for me when I'm doing doubles,
I'm talking like 200 kilo loads. Um
and that's, you know, to do that to do
over 200 kg week in week out
is like of course some people can do it,
but for me, you know, that's twice my
body weight. I'm 100 kilo lifter. For me
to be doing that week after week, it's
just hard on my body.
So, one, it's hard. The next thing is
something that you should never neglect
with your long-term strength journey is
high rep phases. So, volume is probably
one of the biggest contributors when it
comes to
building muscle or hypertrophy.
All right? So, that's one of the
problems with always doing low reps and
not high reps. So, low reps and heavy
loads is you're never really
accumulating enough volume and it's just
not the best way to build muscle. If it
was, that's how all the best
bodybuilders in the world would be
training. So, some people in the
comments might be talking about I'm team
low volume. What about, you know, Mike
Mentzer and all of these approaches and
high intensity and
Okay, cool.
I know that there are exceptions to
every rule, but in general, go and have
a look at the best bodybuilders in the
world
as a whole,
you're not going to find a lot of those
that live in those low rep range
territories.
They might do it from time to time, like
you saw Ronnie Coleman every now and
then doing his heavy singles and
doubles, but that's not the bulk of
their work and that's not the main
reason why they built the most amount of
muscle. The reason why they built the
most amount of muscle is because they
do,
you know, tons of volume.
So much volume, you know, within what
rep ranges? Usually, it's kind of,
you know, eight to 15 rep ranges and
sometimes more.
Not talking about research. Research
tells us it's a really broad range, up
to 30 reps
can be equally as effective for
hypertrophy as five reps, as long as you
take those exercises to failure. But we
need to factor in practicality of these
exercises. So, you know, doing 30 reps
on everything is so much volume, too
fatiguing. And doing low reps of
everything is,
in my opinion, so much damn load on the
body. Your body just needs a rest after
a while.
You know, I guess maybe the rules change
as you get older as well.
You know, I'm 43, so maybe my body
doesn't like lifting heavy. It doesn't
recover as quickly as when I was 20s. I
don't want to say maybe, definitely
that's the case.
Um but then the next thing is, as you
get stronger, you're lifting heavier
weights. So, me in my 20s, I wasn't
doing these weights in my 20s. I think
my best the first time I hit 200 kg in a
bench press, I was 30. Before that, it
was kind of like my max was, you know,
in in my average in my 20s, my max would
have been, you know, 140, 150, 160 kg.
You know, so now, as I'm
it's not just age, it's the accumulation
of years that's contributed to me
getting stronger. So, either way, both
of those things mean that your body
needs time to recover. And this strategy
is something that I'm revisiting because
it allows me to explore the different
rep ranges.
But also, strategically teach my body
how to gradually get from high volume to
gradually, gradually exploring the lower
rep ranges and heavier loads. So,
let me just quickly calculate. 10 8 6 9
7 5 8 6 4 7 5 3 6 4 2 5 3 1. 18-week
program. That's an 18-week program.
Right? Now, I know the questions that
I'm going to be asked here. Is it the
same exercise? Is it the same? Doesn't
have to be the same exercise. You can do
the same exercise the whole way through.
I recommend you include some type of
variations. So, you can go from wide
grip bench press to a close grip bench
press to mid grip bench press and and
change the different exercise, but just,
you know, use the appropriate loads for
those rep ranges. Or, you can just do
specificity the whole time, which is
what some people do successfully. I like
to do variation with my accessory
exercises. But if you follow that, it's
an 18-week program. Now, some people
say, "What if I've only got 12 weeks?"
Well, then just do the last 12 weeks of
that.
So, what does that look like?
Um 8 6 4 7 5 3 6 4 2 5 3 1. That's 12
weeks. So, you can start with the
eights. I started with 10, so I'm doing
an extra six weeks on top of that. But
whatever it is, you get the point. So,
you're basically forcing yourself. So,
for me, I just did two sets of eight.
Next week, I do two sets of six.
So, what weight do you think I can do
for two sets of six? I'll tell you what,
it'll definitely be better than 170 kg.
It kind of forces you
to add weight to the bar. And that's the
point of intelligent periodization is
putting yourself in a position, so it's
like, you know, you're guaranteed to add
weight to the bar. That's one of the
most rewarding parts of training is
watching yourself
progressing and it's measurable. So,
that's what I didn't like about
bodybuilding, looking in the mirror
and looking to see if I've improved, to
see if I'm getting leaner, pinching the
skin around my belly. Am I looking more
defined or leaner or muscular or
whatever it is? It's too damn hard to
measure. But when it comes to strength
training,
it's a very objective, instant
measurement of how much weight is on the
bar and do you lift it or do you not
lift it? This is why I love strength
training so much. It's a lot more
measurable, it's a lot more objective,
and it's a lot easier to track
these metrics. This model of
periodization, rotary periodization, is
what I'm going to be sticking to now.
So, I'm only two weeks in, so that means
I've got 16 weeks to go.
You know, and that means 16 weeks to hit
my heavy single. It takes patience. Who
knows if I'll stick to it. But, you
know, a lot of the times when we write
these programs, it's kind of a guide. Uh
and if things change on the fly, this is
called auto regulation. Uh and that's a
another story for another episode. But
for now, understanding the best way to
auto regulate, that's where people talk
about training intuitively and and
understanding, playing back feel,
understanding if it's there on that day,
you should push it. If it's not, you
should maybe, you know, be reactive with
your deload strategy or whatever it is.
That's called auto regulating. Really
intelligent way of training, but in my
opinion, it's better to learn with some
type of a structure
and build experience before you start
coming in as a beginner saying, "Oh, I
train intuitively. I auto regulate. Uh
if I feel good, I'll lift heavy. If I
don't feel good, I will back off for
that day."
How you feel is a lie.
Sometimes you feel terrible and you
perform very well. Sometimes you feel
amazing and you perform very poorly,
which is why in your early days, don't
go by how you feel. Follow a structure.
And doing these things, understanding
these different models of periodization,
is a really nice tool to have.
Uh
now, here's another little tip for you.
If you want to figure out how much
weight should I add to the bar when I'm
following a periodized model like this?
So, something that I like to loosely
follow is every rep
you reduce,
you can add 4%.
So, therefore, I'm reducing two reps
every phase or every week. So, two reps
means 8%. You can walk past Dinny.
Dinny's being very polite
as she's walking around the the video.
That's Dinny J, by the way.
Hey, 4 months postpartum. How good she
looking? She just She popped a baby out
4 months ago.
How good is that? You know, wow.
You know, I don't want to talk about I
know people get offended with everything
you say and people talk about bounce
back culture and all that. I'm not
talking about that. I'm just praising
Dinny.
I don't I don't care about all these
other other, you know, what to promote,
what not to promote. Dinny came back
from her pregnancy and she was straight
into training. How long did it take you
to get back into your first training
session? I came back week two. Yeah,
after cesarean, mind you.
Yeah, so she had a cesarean and then she
had 1 week off and then she came back
and gently started just slowly, slowly
getting back into it. Um and then 4
months down the track, she's already
deadlifting 105 kg for reps.
Damn. How good's that? Anyway,
good stuff. Um but anyway, so there's a
model of periodization for you to use.
Okay, now, let's talk a little bit more
about this periodized model. That's just
the main work. So, whenever I talk about
periodized plans and rep schemes, I'm
always talking about the main work. So,
you know,
this is for the bench press and then we
add accessories after that. You can
follow that same rep scheme for all of
the lifts, for the squats and for the
deadlifts as well.
And there's lots of ways of doing it,
but
that's the main movement. So, for the
main movement of the day, if you're a
powerlifter, even if you're not a
powerlifter, squats and bench press and
deadlifts and barbell exercises are a
great way to start your session. You
don't have to be a
powerlifter to benefit from those
exercises.
But either way,
choose your main exercise and follow
that rep scheme. Then, the secondary
exercises, that's where you start adding
in the variations and and all of the
other uh muscle groups you've neglected
with your main movement. So, right now,
my first exercise of the day is a flat
bench press and I'm going to complement
that with
incline dumbbell press is on this phase.
So,
I'm not going to follow that
whole protocol for all my accessories as
well. And that's what I don't recommend
you guys do either. So, like, for
example, when you get to the low rep
ranges, like 5 3 1, don't go 5 3 1 with
your main movements and then go
fives or threes in your accessories or
ones with your accessories.
The main movement is stand-alone. The
main movement follows those rep schemes
and the accessory exercises, you want to
separate it. So, you know, I did eights
today. There's nothing wrong with me
continuing with eights
because eights for accessory exercises,
I'll probably superset an incline
dumbbell press with a lat pulldown.
Eights on those are they they fit. But
then, on the next phase, I will pair the
rep range to the appropriate exercise.
So, it's not as if it's a rigid rep
scheme or anything like that. But,
whenever I write a program for someone,
that's how I consider it. That's the
main movement and we separate the
accessories. Anyway, that's a nice
little lesson for you guys. Free little
program. Hope you wrote it down. I know
my video editor will write it on the
screen for you guys. Screenshot it,
maybe.
Screenshot? What are you What are you
going to do? Yeah, I'll do that, but you
were talking about um how you increase
reps. Yeah, okay. So, back to Thank you.
I get I get sidetracked cuz there's so
much to think about when it comes to a
program, you know, like and that's what
actually happens. When I give you guys a
program, everyone's like, "Oh, but what
about this? How much rest you have in
between sets?
How many total sets per uh per session
and how many sets per week and what
frequency and all those things?" Of
course, that's always going to change
and you can follow so many different
strategies with that. But that's just a
base strategy. So, back to loading.
Airplane.
Just going to wait. So, back to loading.
4% per rep range reduced for rep So,
this is two reps reduced. So, we go 10s
to eights to sixes. So, I did, you know,
for me, I say roughly it's 4% per rep.
So, if it's two reps, we're reducing by
8%.
Now, here's the next thing you need to
consider is the incremental increases.
I'm not counting how many percent it is.
I know it's roughly there. You know,
what I don't know what percentage is 160
to 170?
So, what's 10 kg?
That's 8%.
How good's that? So, 10 kg, I'm bang on
the money. I just did it with the
It always ends up being about right. So,
you know, I'm going up in 10 kg
increments, which ends up being 8%
jumps, which is kind of like when you're
dropping reps, that's what is
expected.
That's of course if you're managing your
body weight as well.
So, if you're doing these percentage
increases and expecting a strength
increase,
yet you're in a calorie deficit and
you're trying to lean up, then you need
to manage your expectations because
you're not fueling your body for the
performance that you're asking of it.
Right? So, if I'm asking my body to step
up with my strength and and be able to
increase by 10 kg each week, I need to
do everything right, which is the
recovery. I need to sleep well. I need
to fuel my body for the performance. So,
what does it mean to fuel your body for
performance?
I say at the very least maintaining your
body weight.
Okay, so that's a very easy gauge for
those who don't know how to track their
macros or you'll count their calories or
anything like that. You definitely know
how to stand on the scales and that's a
very easy metric to track. And every day
that's what I do. I step on the scales
and I make sure that my body weight is
the same. So, that's where I've been,
you know, between 100 to
102 kg for the last 4 years
consistently.
Right? So, if I'm a little bit light, I
know that the next day I'll have to eat
a little bit more. If I'm a little bit
heavy, I can just eat a little bit less.
And that's how I That's the easiest way
of eating, you know, intuitively. I know
the best bodybuilders out there are
going to say eating intuitively is a
silly mistake. Yeah, depends on what
your goal is. If your goal is just to
maintain the same body weight and you're
a strength athlete, you know, of course
it's not the best. Tracking calories is
always going to be optimal. However, a
lot of people don't want to track their
calories. Myself included.
If you expect to be able to decrease the
reps, which means you can increase the
load, right? So, I'm I went from 10s to
8s and the next week to 6s,
you can expect, if you're at maintenance
calories or even a little bit of a
surplus, that's the best environment for
strength gain and even muscle building,
is to be in a little bit of a surplus.
But unfortunately, that just means
you're going to get heavier. Or it could
be fortunate, depends on what your goal
is. But,
you know, in my case, I don't really
want to get heavier. This is the body
weight that I want to be.
And, you know, I've done that game. I'm
43. I don't really want to get heavy. I
want to stay this body weight. I'm happy
with the body weight I'm at. And same
with a lot of people that I work with. A
lot of people don't necessarily want to
get heavier. So, maintaining body
weight,
I recommend, you know, a 4% increase per
rep range dropped or 8% for two reps,
which is what this program is. So, that
means if you're doing 80 kg, if you
start your program on 80 kg, then you're
not going to go 80 90 100. You're going
to go 80 85 90
for for 10 reps. 8 reps, 6 reps. Does
that make sense?
You know, so it's roughly
I say roughly 8%. With me, it just so
happened to be exactly 8%. Um but that
was luck. But what I always look at is
the available incremental increases with
the plate selection that you have access
to.
So, with me, you know, I'm doing 10 kilo
jumps. Most gyms only have access to the
smallest
increment plate is 1.25 kg on each side.
So, whenever I'm programming for
someone, I'll always factor in
2.5 kg incremental increases, right? So,
in in 2.5 kg increments. So, whether
it's 2 and 1/2 jump, 5 kilo jump, 7 and
1/2 jump, 10 kilo jump, and so on. You
get my point. Not a lot of gyms own
fraction plates and working off exact
percentages,
uh it can be a little bit of a nuisance.
You know, like for me, and a lot of
people love this strategy and I'm not
[__] on it. For me, I just don't
like it. I like round numbers and clean
numbers.
So,
what's that?
And clean plates. And pretty plates.
Pretty plates and round numbers. Hell
yeah. So, look at that. That's 170. Hey,
look at the plate configuration. Next
week when I'm 180, do you know what the
plate configuration is going to be? It's
not going to be that plus a five. It's
going to be four blues. You got it. All
right? So, round numbers and pretty
plates. That's the goal. So, I'm just
doing everything in 10 kilo increments,
right?
So,
yeah, that's a tool that you can have.
So, when we talk about, you know, reps
and incremental increases, that's a tool
that I like to use. But it really
doesn't work with high reps. So, you
know, with
Usually I say kind of like eight reps
and less, we use that. So, the moment
you get to, you know, 10 reps and 12
reps and 15 reps, those percentages,
they get so skewed. Everyone responds
differently to volume and intensity at
those levels especially at those rep
ranges. But usually under under eight
reps or even even like under six reps,
you know, four reps, sorry, 4% load per
one rep is the sweet spot. So, let's
break that down for you and here's a
tool for you. Your one rep max is 100%.
Logic.
Your two rep max
is 4% less than that. So, that's 96%.
Your three rep max is 4% less than that.
So, that's 92%. Your four rep max 4%
less than that. So, that's 88% and your
five rep max is 84%.
Six rep max is 80%.
Right? Now, that's I don't want to say
that's perfect. It's not perfect. So,
for some people it might be. For some of
you at home, you might think, "Oh,
that's pretty accurate." For a lot of
people, it's kind of around about
figure. But as you get to seven reps and
eight reps, those numbers start to come
a little bit start to become a little
bit more skewed.
So, uh that's a nice little tool for you
to start calculating uh how much load
you should be able to expect when you
increase or decrease reps and and uh
week to week progressions.
Um and uh yeah, that's a nice little
tool for you. Anyway, there's today's
lesson. I hope you enjoyed it. That's a
free program for you. It's called rotary
periodization.
That's not the technical scientific big
term for it. It's
probably more
uh accurately named uh undulating
periodization.
If you need to know what your periodized
style is. A lot of people ask me, "What
style of periodization am I doing?" I'm
like, "There's There's linearity to it.
We are undulating also. We've got a
little bit of conjugate in there." So,
right now I'm going to be doing
Actually, no, I'm doing everything with
eights today. But conjugate means you're
working on multiple physical qualities
simultaneously.
And a lot of the times I do that. So,
when I'm doing my low rep ranges, you
know, like my fives and fours and
threes. I don't do accessories with
fives and fours and threes. I do
accessories with eights and 10s and 12s.
So, that's you could call that that's
conjugating. So, I'm, you know, the five
reps and lower, that's strength. The
eight reps to 12 reps, that's kind of
hypertrophy. So,
you know, a lot of the times with my
periodized styles, the name of the
periodized the style of periodization
doesn't matter so much. A lot of people
like to get technical. Uh but if you
want to get really technical, we're
using all of these different styles and
that's what we have access to.
2025, you don't have to be rigid with,
you know, I follow one single modality.
I'm linear or I'm team conjugate or I'm
team undulating. There is no team.
There is no team. I'm team do what the
[__] works.
Uh anyway, hope you enjoyed that lesson.
I'm going to go and do some accessory
exercises. So, let me talk about my
accessories. What's that?
32 50. I'll do one more one more feel
set on 50
because I think I spoke for a fair few
minutes then.
Um
but this is my incline. So, now that I'm
thinking about it, I'm not going to do
eights. Uh what I was talking about was
you could do eights for accessories.
Um but my appropriate rep range for
this, I'm going to do higher reps.
I'm going to do
I don't want to do eights for dumbbells.
So, for me to do eights on this incline,
I will probably be able to do
65 kg.
Yeah.
I want to do 60 kg. That's my number for
the day. Now, here's the next topic for
you is training to fail or not training
to fail or how many reps in reserve you
should be working to. And there are many
strategies with that. And a lot of
people will say things like don't train
to fail, especially for your big
strength lifts. You know, to a large
degree,
I agree with that. A lot of the times
with those big technical movements,
taking it to fail all the time is a
little bit too much. Even though I
pushed pretty hard then, but I only did
two sets either way. Top sets, main
sets, don't always train to fail. Leave
a little bit in the tank. That's a
decent strategy.
Why do you want to leave a little bit in
the tank? So, that we can have a
successful entire session, which means
if you're taking the first movements to
fail, it's very energy consuming. And if
you're burning up all your energy with
your main movements, then you're not
going to have enough energy to perform
sufficient volume and have high quality
remainder of the session. So, saving a
little bit of reps in reserve does two
amazing things. One, it allows you to be
able to progress from week to week
because you're starting light and you're
allowing room for, you know, you didn't
miss reps and there's more in the tank.
So, you do those more reps in the
following week. But it also allows you
to have a high quality entire session.
Now, here's the thing.
All of the main stuff is done.
So, when it comes to secondary
exercises, we're typically choosing
exercises that come at a lower risk of
fatigue or technical breakdown and
injury. Right? So, we go from the heavy
barbell movements to I'm now going to be
doing dumbbell work with a lighter load.
That lighter loads just have a lower
risk of injury. It's just how it goes.
It's not the bench press is high risk of
injury. Bench pressing with a heavy
loads and one rep maxes come with a
higher risk of injury to doing your 10
rep maxes. So,
I would say
statistically there's more injuries in
powerlifting than there is in
bodybuilding. And the only reason is not
because the exercise selection, but
rather the loads being lifted. So, when
you're doing your accessory exercises,
I'm not going to go as heavy. So, I can
push these exercises closer to failure.
They're not as fatiguing and the risk of
injury is a lot lower.
So,
that's the next strategy. I'll probably,
you know, I'm looking at 60 kg. Maybe
I'll leave a rep in reserve. Uh or maybe
not. I don't know. If it's like going to
end on a good number, then I'll just
keep on going. So, 60 kg,
you know, my thought process is I should
be able to get 60 kg for 10 reps.
Now, if 10 reps is just about right,
which is what I, you know, I'm pretty in
tune with how strong I am, I'll probably
stop at 10 reps. I think that'll be
good.
If it's piss easy
and I can get 12, I'll keep on going.
I don't think I'll get 12.
I think I'll get 10.
All right.
Why did you move that? Some people call
it lazy, I call it intelligent. I'm
moving it right in front of the rack.
So that
all I have to do is grab it from the
rack and sit down.
Kind of just how I thought
it would be.
Um if I really push for it
and made those reps sloppy at the end
and rushed them and
all that, maybe I could have gotten 12,
but
10 ended up being the perfect number.
And you know what I was thinking when I
was doing it, I had uh
last rep syndrome.
The 10th rep, if you watch back, was a
little bit slower than the rest of
those. The rest of it looked smooth.
But then the 10th rep was like a bit
slow on the lockout.
Anyway, it's just what we do. I'm only
going to do one more set of that. Uh in
the meantime, I'm going to do opposing
muscle groups. So, come with me.
So, this is the next
strategy when it comes to programming
and supersetting is supersetting.
Watch out.
The only benefit for supersetting is
time saving.
You don't get any hormonal benefit. You
don't get any carryover from the push to
the pull to to potentiate any of the
lifts or any of that stuff.
The only benefit is time saving. So, if
you have all the time in the world, you
don't have to superset.
So, typically, I like to give myself
about 2 hours for my training sessions
cuz this is my job. This is what I do.
But a lot of people that I work with,
they don't want to spend 2 hours in the
gym. They
allocate They usually allocate about 1
hour for their training sessions. And in
that instance, it's a very intelligent
way to train is to superset the push
with the pull.
So, the way that you do it, I'm talking
and I'm not going to do it yet. I'm
going to give myself a few minutes rest.
So, whenever I do my heavy sets,
instead of doing heavy set and wait,
that's I'm going to give myself 8
minutes rest between sets,
which is what I did for my bench press
as well.
Instead of waiting 8 minutes and doing
nothing,
you wait 4 minutes and you do the
opposing muscle groups. They are non
typically non-overlapping muscles.
So, when I do my push, I'm working my
front delts, my pecs, and my triceps.
When I do my pulls, I'm working my lats,
rhomboids, traps, and biceps.
All right, so let's simplify that. When
I'm doing my pushing, I'm working my
pushing muscles, which is the front of
the body, back of the arms.
When I'm doing my pulling, I'm doing the
back of body, front of the arms.
Opposing muscle groups are
non-overlapping. So, it's an intelligent
way of getting twice the amount of work
in the same amount of time.
Now, here's a few things you need to
consider with that. If you saw my main
exercise for the day, quite often, when
I'm working with strong individuals, I
use them as a standalone. And I tell my
strong individuals, just sit and rest
and recover.
It's not that fatiguing, but there is
some systemic fatigue from doing the
push and the pull.
So, when you're doing a big set like a
big bench press, a big squat, big
deadlift, no need to superset.
Unless you're not that strong.
I mean, don't mean to offend you,
but you know,
that's the same case for me as well.
Like early in my years, I've been
training for over 20 years and and for
most of my years, my first exercise was
like when I was lifting when I was
benching less than 140 or 120 kg, that's
not strong enough to say, "I really need
that rest." You know, so I was able to
do a set of bench press for my main
movement, wait 3 to 4 minutes, and then
do a set of pull-ups, wait 3 to 4
minutes, and then come back.
But now that I'm getting stronger, so
170 kg for eights
pretty strong.
Um yeah, it's pretty strong, I think.
What do you think? Maybe not for you. It
is for me. And therefore, I want to
prioritize that and I want to rest. But
anyway, now, this is a nice strategy.
So,
if you're a strong individual
and you want to prioritize your main
movements, don't superset those. But
then when you do your accessory
exercises,
by all means, superset.
So, I'll be able to So, that was pretty
good set of 10 for 60 kilos incline.
Um I'll be able to do a set of rows,
wait another 4 minutes, and then go and
do another set of 10 on the incline.
It's not really going to interfere with
the strength.
And it's going to save time.
Okay, what rep range am I going to do
for rows?
I'll tell you now, I don't think 10s is
appropriate for rows. I think that's too
low.
It's kind of one of those exercises that
suits
high reps.
Full stretch, round the upper back, and
full retraction and depression of the
scapula.
Full stretch,
squeeze the shoulder blades back and
down.
Protract the scaps, retract the scaps.
Protract, retract.
So, that means I don't just stay here
rigid. You know, some people like to
think that's really good technique
because you're not cheating or using
momentum. This is stretching all of my
mid back muscles by allowing my scapulas
or shoulder blades to protract
or come forward. And if I want to get
the most protraction out of my scapula,
I need to flex or round my upper back. I
need some upper back rounding to occur
to allow for full range of motion.
Do me.
I don't even know how many reps that
was. It felt like about 15.
But that's good. So, that's some
accessories, right? So, we go start with
the bench press. That's a standalone.
Then I'm going to do two sets of these,
which is going to be
nice push-pull. I'm using
the exercise that I'm pairing it with is
targeting what I neglected in the main
movement. So, when you do a barbell
bench press with an arch,
a lot of people's criticism is
you're cheating the range of motion,
it's not good for hypertrophy. Now,
you're not cheating. It's manipulating
levers, which is what's used in a
powerlifting competition.
And yes, it does reduce the range of
motion, but that doesn't mean it's bad
for hypertrophy. There are benefits for
long range of motion, of course. But
either way, I get to make up for that
with my accessory exercises,
which is why I choose
exercises
that are non-redundant. So, it's hitting
that
that group of muscles from a different
angle and a different range of motion.
So, notice my grip position for the
dumbbells is kind of neutral-ish. So,
it's not pronated, it's neutral.
The next thing is longer range of
motion,
which because I'm arching and, you know,
cheating my arched back bench press,
that's a shorter range of motion. So, I
get to make up for that for the
accessories.
And then I slightly change the angle
from flat to incline.
So, I'll do two rounds of that.
And then I'm going to finish with some
arm work.
So,
doesn't seem like a lot. That's, you
know, four top sets of pushing,
two sets of flat bench, two sets of
incline dumbbell press.
But I'm pretty smashed. It's pretty
heavy.
So, therefore, I like to finish the
session. I'm going to do triceps. So,
this is another muscle group
that
is somewhat neglected with my main
pressing. So, here's a lesson for you
guys. If you want complete bicep and
tricep development, you need to include
isolation exercises. Why? Because when
you do compound movements only, there
are muscles in our arms that are called
biarticular muscles. They cross two
joints. So, the triceps, in particular,
the long head of the tricep crosses the
shoulder joint. So, what does that mean?
It means when I perform the press, it's
doing two actions and they are opposing
actions for the long head of the
triceps. So, triceps the long head of
the tricep extends the elbow, which is
what I'm doing in the press, but it also
extends the shoulder. I'm flexing the
shoulder. So, therefore, I'm shortening
the tricep.
Uh sorry, I'm
shortening the tricep
with elbow extension, so it's
contracting, but I'm also lengthening
the tricep through
shoulder flexion. It's too hard to
explain. Lengthening on the down phase
of the elbow and shortening at the
shoulder. And then the opposite on the
up phase, lengthening at the shoulder
and shortening at the elbow. So, it's
conflicting actions and therefore, the
tricep, the length of the long head of
the tricep, remains the same.
So, therefore, the best way to target
long head of triceps is to isolate it.
Before you do for triceps development is
compound pressing, you are going to be
left with slightly underdeveloped long
head of triceps. What's the best way to
factor that in?
Isolate it. Same applies for biceps. The
biceps are also a biarticular muscle.
They cross the shoulder joint and the
elbow joint. So, they are responsible
for elbow joint flexion and shoulder
flexion. When we do a pulling action,
we're doing elbow flexion, but then also
shoulder extension, so that's opposing
actions.
And the length of the bicep
doesn't change that much. So, if all you
do for your bicep work
is compound rowing patterns, rows, pulls
up, pull-ups, and pull-downs, you are
going to be left with underdeveloped
biceps.
For some people, it's not a huge
concern. So, for me in my career as a
powerlifter, it doesn't matter that
much.
I'm sure it'd be better if I had bigger
biceps. Big muscles and strong muscles
is never a disadvantage. But, some
athletes like boxers and
rugby players or or team sport athletes,
they don't need to be running around
with huge arms. So, it doesn't really
matter so much. But, if you are a
bodybuilder and if you care about
aesthetics and if you want to get the
most out of your biceps and triceps, you
need to not rely on compound movements
only. You need to isolate them. Anyway,
triceps extension.
This is easy. I love this.
Walk out of the session with a nice
pump. It's not so hard.
I'm fatigued. I'm smashed. But, there's
always a little bit of energy left for a
quick arm pump.
All right. Full stack.
Can we do it? Of course we can.
16. I wasn't going for a particular
number.
I was going for fail.
Not bad.
Go to fail on your arms. Like, why do
people not go to fail?
Because of the cost of fatigue? How
fatiguing do you think that is? Not
very. It's such a small muscle group.
Unless you got massive arms, but I
don't.
But, it's not very fatiguing. Take that
movement to fail. The idea of not taking
movements to fail is so that you can
have enough energy for more consecutive
sets
or
the rest of the sessions for the
remainder of the week.
And taking your biceps and triceps
isolation exercise to fail is very easy
to recover from. It's not going to
interfere with
any of the other sessions for the rest
of the week.
And this is the last exercise of the
day. So, it's not going to be
interfering with more exercises after
this.
So, take your isolation exercises to
fail.
Totally fine. All right. Next up, bicep
curls.
Leave that out.
Do one more set. One more set of each.
And then I'm done.
I did 16 reps on that.
Uh a little bit of a cheat at the end.
You see me leaning back.
Totally fine. That's assisted
repetitions.
And I had to get 16
because, you know, OCD.
I did 16 triceps extensions.
Anyway, I hope you enjoyed that session.
Hope you enjoyed that programming
strategy.
And
if you want more programming strategies
like that, if you have any questions
about the one that I just gave you, pop
it in the comments below and I'll do my
best to help you. Hope you enjoyed.
Click like, subscribe, all that stuff.
See you next time.
God.
Oof.
Pump. Yeah, bro.
Uh whenever I'm filming for YouTube, I
have to do the work, actually. No.
I have to